 Safety Dividend 


Autonomous vehicles are also expected to be safer. “These cars won't get drunk or high, drive too fast, or take unnecessary risks—things people do all the time,” Chase said.

“Over 90% of accidents today are caused by driver error,” said Professor Robert W. Peterson of the Center for Insurance Law and Regulation at Santa Clara University School of Law. “There is every reason to believe that self-driving cars will reduce the frequency and severity of accidents, so insurance costs should fall, perhaps dramatically.”﻿﻿

“Cars can still get flooded, damaged, or stolen,” notes Michael Barry, vice president of media relations at the Insurance Information Institute. “But this technology will have a dramatic impact on underwriting. A lot of traditional underwriting criteria will be upended.”﻿﻿

Barry said it’s too early to quantify exactly how self-driving vehicles will affect rates, but added that injured parties in a crash involving a self-driving car may choose to sue the vehicle’s manufacturer or the software company that designed the autonomous capability.

Initially, insurers such as State Farm Insurance, Allstate Corp. (ALL), Liberty Mutual Group, Berkshire Hathaway Inc.’s (BRK-A) GEICO, Citigroup Inc.’s (C) Travelers Group could see a huge benefit from lower accident liabilities. But they may wind up losing a big portion of the $200 billion in personal auto premiums they write every year as fewer cars take to the road.

Some experts have even speculated that mandatory insurance for cars could be dropped. And as long as we’re talking about financial services, what about the multitude of banks and creditors that lend buyers money in about 85% of car purchases if sales volume falls?﻿﻿

According to a University of Texas report, if only 10% of the cars on U.S. roads were autonomous, almost $30 billion of savings could be realized via less wasted time and fuel, as well as fewer injuries and deaths. At 90%, the benefit rises to almost $120 billion a year.﻿﻿

Self-driving cars could have a substantial impact on the taxi and limousine industries and could potentially create new ones. Chase noted that they could be used to share specific trips, as a kind of pay-as-you-go small-scale public transportation—for example, taking a disparate bunch of Manhattanites to the same beach in the Hamptons in one trip.
